Forms might seem simple and trivial,
but they are not.
Forms can actually be complex
from a developer's point of view
because forms and their inputs
can assume a broad variety of different states.
One or more inputs could be invalid or valid.
And these are only two states it's even possible
that you could have forms where the state is unknown
because maybe you have some asynchronous validation
where you need to send the request
to a server behind the scenes to check something
to find out if a certain value is available.
Let's say an email address to then find out
whether the input is valid or not.
So it could be even more complex than shown here
but even here we have two states and you must not forget
that these states valid and invalid,
don't just apply to the overall form,
but to every individual input in the form
and extend a sum off the states
of those inputs that make up the overall form state.
Now, when a form and its inputs are invalid
you might want to output input specific error messages
and highlight the problematic inputs.
And you also want to ensure that the form can't be submitted
or saved if one or more inputs are invalid.
If the inputs are valid, though
you of course want to make sure
that it can be submitted and saved.
Now, when we dive into showing error messages
and highlighting invalid inputs
things get even more complex
because to question then is when to validate,
when should you check the user input?
You can validate the user input
when the form is submitted as a whole
you can also check the value entered by a user
once an input loses focus
to then check what the user did
enter the error and find out if it is valid
and you can of course also do that on every keystroke
or on every change to user makes to an input.
Now, when you validate
once the form is submitted as a whole,
you of course allow the user to enter a valid value
before possibly warning him or her.
That means if the user starts typing in
let's say the email field, you don't tell the user
that the entered email address is wrong
before the user even had a chance of entering one.
So that's good.
You wait until the user is done
and then you possibly show an error.
So this avoids unnecessary warnings, but as a downside
the feedback might come a little bit too late.
If I press submit
and you then tell me that something's wrong,
I have to go back
to that input where something was wrong
and enter my value again.
It's not the end of the world,
but maybe not the final user experience
we might want to offer.
Now, when we validate the input, when it loses focus
the good thing also is that we allow the user
to enter a valid value before warning him or her
just as when we waited for the overall form.
But we already do show an error then
once the user is done with that specific input.
So we don't wait for the overall form submission
but we just wait until the user is done
with one specific input.
This can be very useful for untouched forms.
So where do you user hasn't entered anything yet.
The downside with this approach, however,
if you only validate on losing focus
is that if an input was invalid
so if the user did already enter something invalid
and now comes back to fix it
you don't tell the user if it's now valid or not
until he or she is done entering an input.
That's where on keystroke validation might be better.
There you provide direct feedback to the user
on whether the input is valid or not on every keystroke
but as a downside, you here warn the user
before he or she even had a chance of entering valid values.
So if you visit a form for the first time
and you haven't entered anything
you would be greeted with tons of errors
if we only validate on keystroke
because initially everything is invalid, of course
and we haven't given a user any chance
of entering anything valid.
If on the other hand we combine this
with the other methods somehow
and we only validate on keystroke
if the input was invalid before
then we can provide direct feedback
and therefore tell the user, once the input is valid.
And if this is all a little abstract, that's no problem.
We're now going to explore these different approaches
in great detail in this module.
And we're going to see how things behave
and how we can fine-tune this
to come up with the best possible solution.